The Marine Biodiversity Observation Network (MBON) was established to help develop a community of practice and standards to meet the requirements of national monitoring programs and various international treaties and agreements, including UN Agenda 2030, the 2020 Aichi targets of the CBD, the next WOA, and the IPBES efforts to evaluate changes in biodiversity. MBON is a global partnership to provide systematic study of life in the sea. This effort includes building the capability to assess the state of the ocean’s biological resources and ecosystems in a coherent, consistent, and coordinated manner and integrating with other observations that include physical, biogeochemical, and geological measurements. MBON builds on a variety of existing infrastructure and sources of data (Fig. 32.1) that include monitoring of fish, plankton, invertebrates, coral, etc., and programs that have historically assessed marine bMarine biodiversity is the key foundation for the structure and functioning of ocean ecosystems and for providing essential service and benefits for human societies, on local, regional, and global scales (Lotze, 2021). Unsustainable and destructive human activities, such as pollution, habitat destruction, and overexploitation are threatening global marine biodiversity (Lotze, 2021). Unabated climate change is an additional threat and, today, considered a major driver of marine biodiversity loss (IPBES, 2019a, IPCC, 2019a, 2022). For example, wide reaching ecosystem and species responses due to climate change include range expansions or contractions (Morley et al., 2018), changes in species composition (e.g., García Molinos et al., 2016) and species interactions (e.g., Asch, 2015; Grady et al., 2019), and shifting phenology (e.g., Wilson et al., 2016), all of which impact ecosystem function and biodiversity (Eddy et al., 2021; Lotze et al., 2019; Du Pontavice et al., 2020).

Conservation efforts such as marine protected areas (MPAs), MPA networks and marine reserves aim to counteract this biodiversity loss. With the United Nation Initiative “High Ambition Coalition for People and Nature” (HAC), nations across the world have committed to protect 30% of their waters and land by 2030 with the auxiliary aim to address the global climate crisis (HAC, n.d.). These targets are non-binding, but the hope is that they will spur new conservation actions around the world. Currently, only 7.7% of the word’s ocean is under some form of protection, which is considered inadequate to achieve sufficient biodiversity conservation that is needed to bring its continuous loss to a halt (Marine Conservation Institute, 2022). HAC member nations, such as Canada (CAN), Ecuador (ECU), Japan (JPN) or Norway (NOR) have a long way ahead to meet their “30 by 30” commitment (Fig. 13). For example, if Canada is to reach this ambitious target, it requires to more than double the marine area protected currently under some form of biodiversity conservation measure within the next ten years (Bryndum-Buchholz et al., 2022). Many other countries face similar challenges (Fig. 13). In comparison, among those nations that already have relatively high MPA coverage, some will experience strong biomass increases, such as Chile (CHL) and Argentina (ARG) within their polar waters in the Southern Ocean, whereas European nations such as Great Britain (GBR), France (FRA) and Germany (DEU) will experience strong biomass declines that may weaken their MPA effectiveness