The biogeography of marine biodiversity is strongly shaped by the biology of marine organisms, their relationship with the environmental conditions, and their changes. In this section Reygondeau (Chapter 9: Current and future biogeography of exploited marine groups under climate change) analyzes the distribution of marine biodiversity and how it will be impacted by future changes in the environment. Using niche models he notably projects the distribution by 2100 of a large number of marine species, including mammals and some invertebrates, thus highlighting the expected changes in global marine biogeography. The results highlight large areas of the ocean where most marine species would likely be threatened by climate change. Du Pontavice (Chapter 12: Changing biomass flows in marine ecosystems) discusses the effects of ocean warming on the functioning of marine food webs. Using trophic models he shows that warmer oceans are expected to result in less efficient and faster trophic transfers, leading to a global drop in biomass and production, up to −20% by 2100 in the worse climate change scenario. Bernhardt (Chapter 10: Linking individual performance to population persistence) underlines the importance of understanding the thermal biology of organisms in explaining and projecting changes at the biodiversity and ecosystem levels. Particularly, she shows that the use of metabolic theory, informed by experimentation and model simulations, may help to identify the potential of natural adaptation of organisms in the context of future oceans.

Two chapters discuss the importance of observations, their availability, and accuracy in understanding and projecting the changing marine ecosystems and biodiversity, and improving fisheries management in response to these changes. Pauly et al. (Chapter 11: The Sea Around Us as provider of global fisheries catch and related marine biodiversity data) underline the importance of improving global statistics on fisheries catches. They present the reconstruction of global fisheries catches conducted by the Sea Around Us project. The reconstructed catch data help improve our understanding of the changes in global catches and their relationship with fishing and environmental drivers since the 1950s. Such new knowledge helps paint a more accurate picture of human impacts on marine ecosystems, and offers a realistic baseline for management and assessing future changes in ecosystem services. Gonzalez (Chapter 15: Understanding variability in marine fisheries) discusses patterns of population variability in marine fisheries and the role played by environmental fluctuations. He argues that new data provided by satellite remote sensing or by automatic platforms of floats and gliders, as well as high-quality forecast products derived from Earth system modeling, provide the opportunity to develop more realistic probabilistic models and novel approaches to implement dynamics fisheries management strategies.

Henschke (Chapter 14: Jellyfishes in a changing ocean) discusses how the study of jellyfish can be used as a lens to understand the effects of global change on marine ecosystems. Jellyfish populations are commonly expected to benefit from global change as a result of overfishing of jellyfish predators and competitors (planktivorous fish), expansion of invasive jellyfish through translocation by the rapid growth of shipping activities, and expansion of eutrophication events or hypoxic water masses under climate change—jellyfish are generally more resilient to these adverse conditions than many other species. However, the potential expansion of jellyfish in the future may be more uncertain than we envisioned. Henschke shows, using a size-structured population model, that the increase in medusa biomass would be small by 2100, and mainly driven by the increase in zooplankton biomass expected in the shallow waters of northern regions. She highlights the role of jellyfish in marine ecosystems and the need to manage their fisheries in a flexible and localized way under global change.

Roberts (Chapter 13: The role of cyclical climate oscillations in species distribution shifts) discusses current research to understand the influence of benthic substrate and cyclical ocean oscillations, as environmental constraints of the poleward shift of commercial marine species. Using some species of the South Atlantic Bight as case studies, and based on trawl data, she especially shows that links to benthic habitats may lower the expected shifts in fish distribution, while the North Atlantic Oscillation would determine the relationship between species presence and bottom temperature.


