Institutional strengthening, community engagement and the maturation of the integrated coastal management approach defined the post-2000 era as a period when marine conservation took precedence in coastal development deliberations. Underpinning the change from development-centric to biodiversity-centric planning is science, which has established that marine biodiversity enhancement in the urbanized coastal environment is possible and can be incorporated with nature-based solutions for coastal protection. It is well worth investMarine biodiversity offers valuable ecosystem services to people. Massive change in the coastal environment resulting from urbanization presents a serious threat to marine biodiversity. Its loss or decline severely compromises ecosystem service levels and makes sustainability of the marine environment highly challenging.

Marine biodiversity conservation has developed through decades of relentless coastal urbanization pressure that affected much of Singapore's marine environment. Massive land reclamation projects initiated since the 1960s reshaped the coastal profile, decimated natural intertidal habitats and left a lasting legacy of heavily sedimented waters. While coastal development continues to this day, governance and management considerations of marine preservation became more positive from the 2000s. Since then, impact assessments became mandatory for all development projects and mitigation measures to avoid or minimize damage to marine biodiversity were prioritized.

No fixed date can be identified to mark the transformation of marine conservation policy for it is really an evolution of different factors progressing at their own speed and synergizing at the right time. Institutional strengthening, community engagement and the maturation of the integrated coastal management approach defined the post-2000 era as a period when marine conservation took precedence in coastal development deliberations. Underpinning the change from development-centric to biodiversity-centric planning is science, which has established that marine biodiversity enhancement in the urbanized coastal environment is possible and can be incorporated with nature-based solutions for coastal protection. It is well worth investing in marine biodiversity enhancement for its valuable return of ecosystem services.